- [Instructor] Spring Boot 2.0 introduced an upgrade
to Spring data Repositories,
which was the ability to leverage optional return types
in the find by methods.
Optional is simply awesome.
It was introduced to us in Java version eight.
A type leveled solution for representing optional values
instead of null references.
Basically, if you aren't already using optional, you should.
So let's update some of our find by queries
in the course repository that returned one course
to return optional of course.
So in course, getCourseViewByName
I'm going to change the signature.
So getCourseViewByCourseName now returns an optional value.
We're going to the debugging demos
and we see this causes a compilation error,
as it should 'cause we're no longer returning
the actual course view.
We're returning an optional.
So if I say .get
after it that will actually get the course view of it.
I'm actually going to try some other calls on that optional.
So I can say getCourseViewByName English 101,
orElseThrow an exception.
So if it does not find that English 101
then an exception will be thrown.
And just to show you what happens,
I'm going to put in a course that
doesn't exist called English 100.
And I'm going to call get on it.
And then let's run this.
Okay, we've hit our breakpoint,
so let's call the first one getCourseViewByName
and then the get.
And here we have our views.
They've returned English 101 back.
Next well try it in orElseThrow.
It did not throw an exception
so we got the view back as English 101 again.
Now let's try it with English 100, rather,
and call get.
And we see that an exception is thrown.
And it says, NoSuchElementException No value present.
So let's handle that better.
We'll get rid of the class that was invoked there.
And instead, we're going to say
get English 100 and if that doesn't exist
then we're going to return a new CourseView.
We'll call alt orElse.
So what happens here?
It's going to look up English 100 which doesn't exist.
So it's going to run this code orElse
and construct a new temporary courseView,
and that's what view will be assigned to it.
So let's run that in debugger.
Oops, we got to compile.
Compilation there, that's, you need.
There.
So here we get the regular English 101 CourseView,
English 101 did not throw an exception.
And now we're going to step over this method,
and now the CourseView is the dummyCourse that we created.
Now let's go back to the CourseRepository
and we see we have a findByName method
that returns a course.
And I just want to show you a little bit of
if we did not have optionals
and a null value was returned
at how we would handle that.
So here we have that method called findByName English 101.
And if it did return a null then we
would get a null pointer exception here
when we call getId on it.
So we want to say if english101 is not equal to null,
then invoke this code.
So now I'm going to run that.
And of course english101 is not null
so we actually go and call methods on the english101 course.
So let's now have it return an optional instead
and see how more slick the code can become
without the ugly null checks.
Now let's take a way the declaration of english101
and we're going to actually leverage using a lambda here.
We say .ifPresent
take out the null check.
And then run that code.
And then here is the end of the lambda.
So let's run this now.
So what this is happening is the optional
now allows us to use a lambda with ifPresent.
Here is our english101 and it actually runs in there.
So let's
run that in the debugger again.
So I'm just going to hit go because it's difficult in debuggers
to step into a lambda.
So we just want to make sure that we hit that breakpoint,
and we do hit that breakpoint for english101.
Let's see what happens if we change this to English 100.
So now I'm going to resume my program,
and we should not hit that breakpoint inside the lambda.
And we don't.
I love optionals and having optional return types
on Spring Data Repository creator methods
has made me a happy developer.